# COMPUTATIONAL MODELING AND SIMULATION OF WILDLIFE DISEASE DYNAMICS: DETERMINING HOW TO PRIORITIZE LIMITED RESOURCES

### [GRAZIELLA V. DIRENZO](https://grazielladirenzo.weebly.com)

### Please contact the first author for questions about the code: Graziella DiRenzo (grace.direnzo@gmail.com)
__________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________

## Abstract: 
Conservation managers rely on the accurate estimation of host population dynamics to assess how populations respond to an intervention or evaluate their long-term stability. Inference about population dynamics typically requires intensive data collection where individuals are uniquely marked and tracked over time, such as mark-recapture methods. These data produce high quality information, but data collection at large spatial and temporal scales can be prohibitive, difficult, or impractical. Additionally, when recapture rates are low, typical of populations of cryptic species and/or low abundances, these data perform poorly in mark-recapture models. Thus, methods that provide similar inference for unmarked populations (i.e., populations where individuals are not distinguished) are critically needed. Recently developed open N-mixture models provide a fully mechanistic framework to estimate abundance and demographic rates without the need to uniquely mark and track individuals that accounts for animals that are not observed during sampling (i.e., imperfect detection). While new stage-structured open N-mixture models present an important advancement in the use of count data for estimating population dynamics when two stages are present (i.e., female/male, juvenile/adult, infected/uninfected), it is unclear how comparable the demographic estimates of the multistate open N-mixture model are to traditional multistate mark-recapture models. Here, I will explore how parameters and sampling design influence precision and bias of demographic estimates of a multistate mark recapture model and a multi-state N-mixture model using a simulation approach. I will use JAGS (i.e., Just Another Gibbs Sampler, a program for analysis of Bayesian hierarchical models using Markov Chain Monte Carlo [MCMC] simulation) and R for simulations. Each chain from a single simulation is run independently on one core for a given set of parameters. I will perform simulations for 5,000 parameter combinations and multiple nodes will be used to submit calculations simultaneously. Each simulation takes between 2.2 to 3.5 hours. This project aimed to understanding which models to use under what conditions (i.e., small vs. large host populations), subsequently having large implications for study design and resource allocation.

## Repository Directory
### [Nmix_model](https://github.com/Grace89/MODELING-AND-SIMULATION-OF-WILDLIFE-DISEASE-DYNAMICS/tree/master/CMR_model/Nmix_model): Contains code for uploading models to Comet, the disease-structured N-mixture model, analysis, and results.
### [CMR_model](https://github.com/Grace89/MODELING-AND-SIMULATION-OF-WILDLIFE-DISEASE-DYNAMICS/tree/master/CMR_model): Contains code for uploading models to Comet, the Jolly-Seber model, analysis, and results.
